The Project Gutenberg eBook of Suggestions for the Prevention of
Juvenile Depravity, by Benjamin Rotch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Suggestions for the Prevention of Juvenile Depravity

Author: Benjamin Rotch

Release Date: April 20, 2022 [eBook #67892]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUGGESTIONS FOR THE
PREVENTION OF JUVENILE DEPRAVITY ***





                              SUGGESTIONS
                                FOR THE
                             PREVENTION OF
                          JUVENILE DEPRAVITY,

                                  BY
                            BENJAMIN ROTCH.

          ONE OF HER MAJESTY’S JUSTICES OF THE PEACE FOR THE
                         COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX.


               _Printed for Private Distribution only._


                                 1846.


                                London:
           PRINTED BY H. COURT, 26, BROOKE STREET, HOLBORN.




                              SUGGESTIONS


For the prevention of JUVENILE DEPRAVITY, and the consequent diminution
of the heavy Burthens cast, first, upon private Individuals by numerous
petty Thefts, and lastly, upon the County by the oft repeated Arrests,
Examinations, Committals, Prosecutions, and Imprisonments of JUVENILE
OFFENDERS.

For many years the public mind has been trained to believe that an
improved Prison Discipline was the Panacea for the prevention of crime,
and it is only necessary to point to that valuable and most excellent
Institution at Parkhurst to shew how earnestly (_so far as regards
Juvenile Delinquency_) men of the first Station and the first Talent of
the day, seconded by the powerful aid of the Legislature have devoted
themselves to the subject, for it is impossible for an enlightened
statesman to view the deeply-dyed depravity which exists among the
Children of the lower orders, and not feel that no Government deserves
the proud title of a _Paternal Government_ that can allow such a state
of things to continue, if any remedy can be suggested.

The opinions which I have ever held on this subject have remained
unaltered amidst all the various changes that have taken place in
the Public mind, on the subject of Prison Discipline, the degrading
home Slavery of the Hulks, and the awful severance of all natural
ties by transportation to distant climes. I have ever held all these
to be ineffectual for the purpose of raising the moral standard of
a great Nation, and still more ineffectual in promoting that social
and domestic happiness which ought to be the bond of Union of an
enlightened and Christian People. Nevertheless, I have not hesitated
to put my shoulder to the wheel, and have laboured hard to improve
our system of Prison Discipline, believing that we shall always have
criminals to deal with, but deeply impressed also with the conviction
that it is more consistent with the views of Christianity and common
sense, that our exertions should be directed to the prevention of
crime, especially among the young, than to the correction of criminals,
who have been allowed by our present system to become enured to the
commission of it.

A most interesting investigation which I have been lately carrying on
as a Visiting Justice of the House of Correction at Cold Bath Fields,
justifies me in predicting that when more is done to prevent crime than
to punish it, our labours to diminish the burthens on the county purse
will be crowned with far happier results than any we can now present
to public view for the purpose of obtaining public support. From the
Investigation before alluded to, it is evident that the want of proper
parental care and the absence of domestic comforts are the two by far
most fruitful and most manifest springs from which flows one vast tide
of Juvenile Depravity and Crime, though let it not be supposed for a
moment that these two springs cannot still further be traced to one
deep seated source which might with God’s assistance be speedily dried
up; but the public mind is not yet prepared for this discovery, and we
must be content to deal with the two main springs of crime to which I
have alluded, until the public mind is more enlightened on the subject.

The recent Establishment of Baths and Wash-Houses for the Working
Classes, and the efforts lately made to provide suitable and
comfortable dwellings for the Poor, show that the current of public
opinion is fast waking up to the paramount importance of domestic
comforts to secure social happiness. Without them, HOME (that otherwise
Magic word) can have no charms, for either the old or the young,
and they are induced to seek pleasure abroad among the countless
temptations of sin and depravity. Nothing can be more faithfully or
more graphically depicted than the character and occupations of the
young Thief of our great Towns, given by my excellent Friend and worthy
colleague, Mr. Buchanan in his _Remarks on the causes and state of
“Juvenile crime in the Metropolis,”_――but the remedy he proposes, falls
far short I fear of what would be required to effect his purpose; and
as I differ from him in some of the most prominent features of his
plan, I am induced to follow his example and place my views before my
brother Justices in a printed form for their consideration, in the hope
that others will do the same, and that out of our various suggestions
some practicable plan may be formed to meet the crying Evil which all
admit, but for which so few seem prepared to suggest a remedy, and
which has now become of such magnitude as to elicit universal and
repeated complaints from Judges, and Juries, Justices, and Magistrates,
and all concerned in the administration of our Criminal Laws.

It is in vain that the resources of the Government and Talents of its
Executive are taxed to improve the condition and management of our
penal settlements. To the young Minister entering for the first time
on the duties of a colonial Secretary, the difficulties which this
department of his office presents must be truly appalling, while he
must feel that the present state of some of our penal settlements
is a disgrace to civilized humanity――Has not money and talent enough
been yet expended without adequate results to convince the Government
(to use a homely Yorkshire phrase) that “_they have got hold of the
wrong end of the stick_?” The present system is to allow a youth to
become well hardened in villainy before he is transported. He is
maintained alternately by the plunder of the public out of prison, and
by the county purse in prison at a great expense for years; and after
multiplied convictions for every grade of offence, from the trifling
assault to the Highway Robbery and Mid-night Burglary, running through
the mazes of every yard in the Gaol, carefully imparting into each
the infamous tact, guilty ingenuity, and foul associations, slang
language and wicked passions of the others, thus setting at naught
all the carefully defined, and law enacted rules of what I have ever
deemed to be under such circumstances, miscalled classification, he
is at length deemed a worthy subject for Transportation, and is sent
out to our penal colonies to form one of a community so depraved and
degraded that, in moments of calm consideration, one is shocked at the
means necessarily there resorted to, to make it manageable at all. A
stupendous difficulty to the Executive abroad and a constant source
of painful contemplation to the Government at home. Surely when we
are driven by the earnest and justifiable remonstrances of our hard
working colonists, who can no longer bear the constant infusion of such
a polluted stream of Emigration among their industrious population, to
found a new Colony in North Australia, at an enormous outlay, it would
be wise to consider if a much less expense properly incurred at home
might not effect far better results and be more like “_getting hold of
the right end of the stick_.” It must be an obvious and admitted fact
that old offenders for the most part rise from the ranks of Juvenile
Depredators, and to cut off the supply to the former from the latter
class would undoubtedly be striking at the root of the evil, and which
might be done at home, where we can get at it conveniently instead of
dealing with the branches many thousands of miles off, and at every
possible disadvantage in Van Diemen’s Land and Norfolk Island. Surely,
then, common sense points out that all our efforts should be directed
to stay the plague of Juvenile depravity at home; and before I venture
to suggest a means of accomplishing this Herculean task, let me ask
three plain and simple questions――

1st. Has the Ministry of the Gospel the proper and divinely appointed
instrument for the eradication of all sin, through the enforcement of
Principles destructive of the love of all sin, been effectual for the
purpose? Manifestly not.

2nd. Has education as now conducted, tho’ undoubtedly a great boon
to the poorer classes, and poured upon them in 10,000 streams from
the benevolent fountain of charity been effectual for the purpose?
Manifestly not.

3rd. Has an improved Prison Discipline with its enlightened committees
of Visiting Justices and Prison Inspectors, and its piles of
Parliamentary Enactments been effectual for the purpose? Manifestly not.

The present agitated state of public feeling on the subject of Juvenile
Crime and Juvenile Criminals loudly proclaims that no other answer can
be given to these questions, and we are therefore not only justified,
but actually called upon by the hallowed voice of Religion and of
common Humanity, to seek some new remedy for the acknowledged evil. We
must neither be alarmed by the novelty of such remedy, nor deterred by
its cost if it has common sense for its foundation, and practicability
in its details. And now for the remedy I would propose.

I should certainly not have ventured to follow on the footsteps of my
able friend Mr. Buchanan so closely, by printing and circulating my
views on the subject if our plans had not so widely differed in most
essential features; but this being the case I am anxious that our
views should be in the hands of our Brother Justices as nearly at the
same time as possible, so that our discussions in the committee which
has been appointed to consider of the subject of Juvenile Offenders
may extend over both plans, and that the Committee may be the better
enabled to decide between them.

Mr. Buchanan does not contemplate any legislative Interference――I
contend that nothing effectual can be done without it――Mr. Buchanan
looks to the County Rate for the means which, however, unfortunately
is not available for the purpose. I look to the Treasury――Mr. Buchanan
proposes a withdrawal from contaminating Association only during
the day――I propose an entire separation day and night from all bad
Companions――and lastly Mr. Buchanan’s is a voluntary System――mine a
compulsory one.

Having thus drawn attention generally to these marked differences
between the two plans, I will now proceed to develope my own in the
firm conviction that it would be found both effectual and practicable.

                   *       *       *       *       *

I propose that a bill should be passed by the Legislature, the Preamble
of which should in effect state, that the fearful extent of Juvenile
Depravity and Crime in the Metropolitan Districts and in large and
populous Towns requires generally immediate Interference on the part of
the Legislature.――That the great causes of the said Juvenile Depravity
and Crime appear to be the absence of proper Parental or Friendly
care, and the absence of a comfortable home, and that all Children
above the age of 7 and under the age of 15 years suffering from either
of these causes require protection to prevent their getting into bad
company, learning idle and dissolute habits, growing up in ignorance
and becoming an expence and burthen on the Country as Criminals, and
that such protection should be afforded by the state.

I propose that the various clauses of the Act should enact as follows――

I. That an Asylum for unprotected and destitute Children be founded by
the Government to be called the CHILD’S HOME.

II. That Commissioners be appointed to manage such Asylum.

III. That provision be made in such Asylum for instructing Children in
all useful arts, trades and occupations suitable to the working classes.

IV. That unprotected and destitute children shall be deemed to include
all children above 7 and under 15 years of age under the following
circumstances,――Children driven from their homes by the bad conduct
of Parents――Children neglected by their Parents――Children who are
Orphans and neglected by their friends――Children who are Bastards, and
children who are Orphans, and have no one to protect them or provide
for them, or for whom no one does provide――Children who from their own
misconduct have no protection or provision found them――Children who
are idle or dissolute, and whose Parents or Friends cannot controul
their bad conduct――Children who are destitute of proper food, clothing,
or education owing to the poverty of their parents or friends,
but whose parents or friends do not apply for, or receive parish
relief――Children who are destitute for want of employment, and children
of the class which become Juvenile Offenders generally.

V. That any such Child as aforesaid may be brought before any Two
Justices of the Peace by any Constable or other peace Officer or by any
Overseer of the poor or other parish Officer and evidence on oath being
given to the satisfaction of such Justices that the Child is one of
either of the classes enumerated in the foregoing clause, such Justices
may sign an order for the admission of the Child into the Asylum.

VI. That when in the Asylum if not claimed or redeemed as hereinafter
provided, the Children shall be subject to be dealt with as the state
thinks proper, to serve as Sailors or Soldiers or Workmen in public
works, or as Artificers or Tradesmen, or as Household Servants, or as
and wherever the state may require.

VII. That on a Child being admitted into the Asylum, enquiry shall be
made by the Commissioners as to the circumstances of the Parents or
other persons now by law bound to support the said Child, and if found
able to support, or to contribute to the support of the said Child, the
Justices sending the said Child to the Asylum may make orders from time
to time for any amount of contribution to be paid, for or towards the
support of the said Child in the said Asylum.

VIII. That such sums be collected for the use of the Asylum by the
Overseer or Rate Collectors of the Parish where the persons on whom the
order is made reside, and that power be given to attach the property of
such persons, or wages in the hands of Masters, or due from Masters of
such persons, in cases of working people or servants, to satisfy the
amount named in such order.

IX. That all Children sent to the said Asylum be taught several useful
Trades, Arts or Occupations, besides the usual education of Reading,
Writing and Arithmetic.

X. That if at any time any Parent or Friend should be able and willing
to afford proper Protection and Employment for any Child in the said
Asylum, subject to the approbation of Two Justices the Child may be
permitted to leave the Asylum on such Parent or Friend’s paying a sum
to be settled by the Commissioners of the Asylum for such Permission.

                   *       *       *       *       *

One general Feeling which any suggestion for the taking of Children
away from parental care usually creates is, that it will be immediately
abused by unfeeling Parents wishing to get rid of the burthen of
maintaining their Offspring, but it is conceived that the plan of
taxing the Parents or Relatives for their maintenance in the Asylum as
provided in the 7th and 8th clauses will be an adequate check for the
prevention of any such abuse, while the Children becoming valuable by
the sort of useful Education that is given them, will no doubt induce
many a Parent to seek the means of getting their Children home again
to assist by their valuable labour in support of the Family. We know
perfectly well that the first years of a Boy’s Apprenticeship are never
spent in really learning the Trade he is apprenticed to learn, he is
used by his Master as an errand boy, a servant, a groom, or even doing
house work for some years in many cases before he begins to learn his
Trade, and why? because if he learned his Trade at once, he would
become so valuable that he could easily get work for himself, and so
impatient to work upon his own account that he would be sure to run
away before his time was up. We know by our experience in the House of
Correction at Cold Bath Fields, that a boy may be made an excellent
Shoemaker in Twelve Months, and that he might be made an equally good
Tailor in an equally short time, admits of no doubt, while the business
of a Tinman, a Shoeing Smith, a Painter, and an hundred others are
learned with similar facility. Each Child taught a few of these useful
Arts, instead of being a burthen upon, would be a valuable addition
to a Family. I know I shall be told that the difficulty of providing
for these Children however well taught, will be almost insuperable,
and I shall see Parkhurst pointed at as a great example of this sad
truth. It is in fact no example for me. There all the Children _have
been criminals_, have been allowed to drink deeply of the cup of vice,
and if not after trial, have at any rate before trial been subject to
the, I may say almost electrical, contamination of Gaol Association,
so rapidly does it take effect. There the foul impress of Felony or
Misdemeanour is stamped upon them all before they are offered to the
Public as useful members of Society. The Children of the Asylum will
be of a far different class. They will be taken before the actual
commission of crime has been brought home to them, when surrounded
by want destitution and injustice from the poverty or drunkenness
or depravity of those who should be, but are not, their natural
protectors, they would inevitably have fallen a prey to those who are
ever on the look out for just such suffering creatures to make them,
though only yet half willing, the tools of practiced crime; to become,
when further advanced in sin, hardened and emboldened in Iniquity, and
thus proper Candidates for Parkhurst.

The Experiment has never been tried of A STATE PROVISION _for
innocent, but destitute and unprotected Children_, nor of a compulsory
payment from the parent for _the proper maintenance and education of
his Child_. I must not be told therefore of Refuges and Magdalens and
Schools of Industry and Philanthropic Societies and Provisions for
Poor criminals on their release from prison, or of any results which
have followed on their adoption, as reasons why my plan should not be
tried, they are no examples for this purpose. I am satisfied from a
long experience in such matters, that no difficulty would be found in
placing out boys well taught, well brought up, under rules of strict
discipline, and who have not yet become criminals. The expense of
maintaining them as innocent children will be far less than that of
maintaining them as felons while we shall be destroying the root of
this Upas Tree which stands in the midst of every densely populated
Neighbourhood, spreading its branches so far in every direction that
the good and virtuous even can at length reach them, and think they are
destroying the tree by endeavouring to keep its unwieldly limbs within
bounds by the pruning knife. A most fatal error!

How much longer will the overburthened Ratepayers endure to see a
drunken Father earning from 30 to 50 shillings a week (and there are
thousands of such) turn into the Gin Palace or the Beer Shop with his
hard earned wages on the Saturday Night to spend it all in strong
drink and debauchery. How much longer will that Ratepayer be content
to lose from his unguarded Stall, or it may be even his well watched
Premises, the petty Articles which the starving Children of that
drinking sot are purposely sent out to steal to appease the craving
of unsatisfied hunger? How much longer will that Ratepayer be content
to pay the enormous sums which are daily drawn from his too often
slender resources to pay the heavy cost of the repeated apprehensions
by the Police, examinations, remands, re-examinations, and committals
by the Magistrates and Justices, Trials and Convictions by Juries,
Sentences by Judges, and Imprisonments in our Gaols of those wretched
Children? How much longer will intelligent Juries, men not only of
common sense, but of common humanity, continue to present the state of
Juvenile Depravity, and the mode of disposing of Juvenile Depredators
as unsatisfactory and inhuman, and be satisfied to see nothing done on
either subject in the way even of an effort to improve? How much longer
will the Ministers who rule this great nation, be they of what politics
or what party they may, remain deaf to the thousand tongues that are
daily proclaiming that nothing has yet met the hourly increasing evils
of Juvenile depravity, and not make some bold attempt to meet the
difficulty in some new form and in some incipient stage less appalling
than that which idleness and destitution present when matured into
vice and depravity? It must be remembered that the Children with whom
I propose to deal are the very same beings who are now dealt with by
the state under the far more expensive character of criminals, and the
simple question in the case as a matter of finance will be whether
it would be more expensive to maintain any given number of innocent
Children, and educate them as I propose they should be educated, than
to capture, try, and maintain an equal number of Adult Felons at home
and abroad at the enormous cost at which they are now dealt with. No
one could for a moment doubt that the balance would be greatly in
favor of the new plan now suggested, if considered only as a financial
one; but in every other point of view how far more desirable must it
be to prevent than to punish crime? To change the system of education
among the working classes, and instead of teaching them to arrive at
an excellence in Reading, Writing, and Arithmetic, which only makes
them seek places above that which Nature destined them to fulfil,
to have them taught those useful Arts which they can employ in every
situation of their humble station in Society, learning to Read and
Write, and keep accounts merely as ancillary to those useful trades
and occupations by which they are to get their living, and so to add
to the general stock of comfort and happiness among their fellows. To
stop the wages in the hands of the employer which an abandoned and
depraved Mechanic would squander on his own ruin, and disburse it for
him on the legitimate object of maintaining and properly educating his
own offspring. In a word to dry up the springs of Juvenile depravity at
their source, instead of endeavouring to deal with the raging flood of
Crime, which experience has long taught us when once abroad sweeps away
with resistless force every barrier which finite wisdom has ever yet
suggested for arresting its awful progress.

This consideration alone should induce us not hastily to condemn any
suggestion, however novel or gigantic it may at first sight appear,
and will I trust gain from my Brother Justices of Middlesex for my
humble endeavour, in what I consider the greatest field for exertion
ever opened to the Philanthropist, a few moments Investigation of a
plan which, however soon a better may supersede it, is the result of
many years of anxious Enquiry and careful investigation, and which I am
prepared to show involves no principle which has not been previously
acknowledged and acted upon by the Legislature.

                                                     BENJAMIN ROTCH.

    Lowlands,
      Harrow on the Hill,
        Middlesex.
 21st June, 1846.




 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Printer’s, punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently
   corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUGGESTIONS FOR THE PREVENTION
OF JUVENILE DEPRAVITY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
